Subject:
Web Page Materials
From:
Lum Farr <farr@wc.edu>
Date:
Tue, 01 Aug 2006 16:37:54 -0500
To:
aubri@caffeinewebdesign.com


 Place this under Student Publications
 **



 *Forensics in the Life of a Racehorse*


   Forensic Science – The application of science to those criminal and
   civil laws that


   *are enforced by police agencies in a criminal justice system (20).** *

When you hear the words forensic science, an immediately picture of a crime scene comes to mind. However, in the day to day life of a racehorse in training and in breeding farms around the world, forensic science has become part of that life. While it is not called forensic science, and most people involved in the industry don’t recognize it as such, forensic science is used to enforce drug laws and establish parentage of racehorses around the world. Without forensic toxicology, horses would be given performance altering drugs, in the “win at all cost” world, and without DNA testing, that million dollar horse you bought could be a sale barn reject rather than the full brother or sister to Funnycide. The horses aren’t the only facet of the industry subject to forensic testing, the people involved in racing are subject to drug testing as well as the animals.

A racehorse, in fact most purebreds, today, are DNA tested shortly after birth.
The Jockey Club, who registers all thoroughbreds in the United States, Puerto Rico and
Canada requires DNA for parentage verification. The Jockey Club also requires
DNA verification on all stallions and broodmares. Since 2001, all stallions,
Broodmares and foals must have their parentage verified by DNA analysis. DNA genetic
material can now be taken from submitted blood samples, or more recently from hair
samples. This DNA rule also applies to horses being imported to the United States,
Puerto Rico, and Canada, as well as exported horses from these countries. The AI
breeding programs among Quarter Horses, Paints, and Arabians also require DNA
testing to verify the parentage of not only the foals, but also the sire and dam.

As early as eleven months before he is born, DNA testing enters the life of
a foal. Both of his parents have been DNA tested to verify their parentage, and so
will the baby. Anywhere from several weeks to several months after the foal is born,
his tail is pulled. The hair must have some root attached for DNA testing. This is
the foal’s introduction to forensic science. The hair is sent to The Jockey Club, who
tests the foal’s hair, and compares the results with the parent’s DNA. For the sake of
example, we are using a Thoroughbred foal, but Quarter Horses, Paints, and Arabians
all undergo the same type of DNA testing prior to racing. The testing procedure is the
same as is used for humans.

After the lab tests the foal’s hair, and establishes his/her parentage authentic, this
DNA profile is added to the Jockey Club Database for future reference. The Quarter
Horse Association, The Paint Horse Association, and the Arabian Registry all keep
a database of DNA profiles of their registered horses. The foal’s registration papers will
have the words, “parentage verified” on the front. The foal’s DNA is now entered into
an international database of DNA profiles. The foal’s next encounter with forensic
science will be when he is tattooed. The foal cannot be entered to race or officially work
without a tattoo number on his upper lip. The tattooer will not apply this number unless
the papers have the word, “parentage verified”. If, for whatever reason, the foal has not
been DNA tested to this point, the testing to verify parentage will be done, or the foal will
not be allowed to race. These rules are enforce by law, and anyone caught trying to
bypass, or skew the results are not only subject to having their racing license revoked,
but are also subject to state and federal prosecution.

When the colt reaches the age of two, he is considered, old enough to be
entered in an official race. On the day of the race, he is “vet checked”, or the state
veterinarian will go to the barn and check the tattoo number on his lip and check him for
lameness. If he is found to be sound, and able to race, the next stop will be the holding
barn. Here the horses, for the next race, are held until called to the saddling paddock.
The holding barn has security, track officials, and state veterinarians on site to make
sure no horse is given any drug or substance to enhance or damage his performance in
the race. The tattoo is checked and matched to the horse’s registration papers. Anyone
caught violating these rules will be arrested and subject to severe penalties under the law.

The horses are then called to the saddling paddock to be saddled. The paddock
judge or an official licensed with the state racing commission checks the lip tattoo, again
to make sure the horse who was entered, is the horse who is waiting to be saddled. Once
the tattoo is verified, the horse is saddled, and lead out to where the rider will be legged
up. The horses are then lead to the track where they are taken to the starting gates.

Forensic science enters his life again after the race. If the horse places first,
second and in some cases third, they are taken to the test barn to be tested for illegal
substances. The officials also have the authority to drug test any horse after a race.
Here, the horses are walked, watered lightly, and cooled out. They are then put in a stall
and a state lab technician will wait until the horse urinates to collect a sample for the
state laboratory. After the horse urinates, the urine collected, is then taken into the lab
and divided into two samples, this is called, “the split”. This is done so if the first sample
returns inconclusive, or the results are disputed, then the second sample is tested. If the
test comes back clean and there is no dispute, the second sample is thrown away. In the
case of a horse who will not urinate, and there are a few who wait, after a specific time
has elapsed, blood will be drawn. In some instances, if the winning horse is injured
during the race, the state vet has the option whether to wait on a urine sample or draw
blood, for analysis. Up to this point, the colt has been subjected to DNA verification,
on multiple occasions, and now laboratory toxicology testing. Most labs use the GCMS
to test for illegal substances.

The state racing commission has a list of illegal substances, which if found in
any amounts in the urine or blood, will result in immediate disqualification of the horse
in question. However, this is where the horses and riders both meet forensic science.
The Texas Racing Commission rules in Sec. 311.302 SUBJECT to TESTING, states:
a. The stewards or racing judges may require an occupational licensee …to submit to a urine
test or other non-invasive fluid test at any time while on association grounds.
b. A licensee who refuses to submit to such a test when requested to do so by the
Stewards or racing judges shall be suspended for at least 30 days.

For a second refusal,Section b incurs a six month suspension, and for a third refusal, the same section gives a
one year suspension and referred to the Commission.

The Racing Commission in Sec. 311.303 under METHOD of SELECTION describes the procedures used to decide who gets tested.

Sec. 311.303 (a)…licensee may be selected for testing under this subchapter by a method of random selection prescribed by the executive secretary.

(b) An occupational licensee may be selected for testing at any time while on association grounds on the basis of /reasonable belief/.

A jockey, owner, trainer, groom, valet, assistant starter, or any other staff member is subject to random testing. All states have similar drug testing regulations. As an example, at Del Mar racetrack in California, stewards suspended jockey Patrick Valenzuela. “Valenzuela was suspended July 2 at Hollywood Park after failing to submit hair samples for testing for drug use” is but one example of nationwide testing. This suspension comes after he failed to submit hair for regular testing. The President and founder of the American Toxicology Institute, Daniel Berkabile, said, “testing of hair is more reliable than traditional urine samples.…illegal substances used several months earlier can be found in hair samples.” Urine test samples were sited as, “unreliable after several days.” (7)(9)

This wasn’t the first drug suspension this jockey received. He has received at
least six suspensions over fifteen years of riding. However, in recent years he has
submitted to numerous urine tests, all of which were negative. The end of this story has
an interesting turn, after being reinstated, the state of California appealed, Valenzuela
missed the Triple Crown races, but was allowed to ride again. The stipulation, he be
drug tested, sometimes up to 3 times a day, the first week back. He kept his agreement
with the racing commission for the first week. The next week, he was missing from the
lineup. No one was surprised, in the past he had bought urine to pass tests, he was known
to be dirty. The next week, when he showed back up, he had shaved every hair off of his
body. He was suspended indefinitely.

For years the Maine Health an Environmental Testing Laboratory has been
involved in drug testing in horse racing. The Drug Chemistry Section uses color and
microscopic tests; thin layer chromatography; infrared spectrophotometry; and GCMS,
to identify controlled substances in people and animals, but also substances seized by
law enforcement officers. The drugs usually tested for are, marijuana, cocaine, LSD and
heroin.

The Harness Racing Unit analyses blood and urine from winning horses and other
randomly chosen horses from the same race. The blood and urine are tested, and any
substance found is subjected to GCMS for analysis and identification of the substance.

The use of hair testing, as well as GCMS testing makes it harder for the jockeys
to ride while using illegal substances. Many of the drugs used today are illegal street drugs, and many are bought in Mexico or other foreign countries. Many of the drugs brought in from outside of the United States are deadly, and has killed at least one jockey in California, Chris Antley.

Chris Antley had battled drug addiction and his weight for years. He had his
New York jockey’s license suspended in 1988 after testing positive for cocaine, and
marijuana. He retired for several years, and when he returned to racing, he was
clean and light. He had a very successful return to racing, by winning the 1999
Kentucky Derby on Charismatic. On December 2, 2000, Chris Antley was found
dead in his Pasadena home. The cause of death was ruled an accidental overdose of
Clobenzorax, a weight control drug from Mexico. Along with Clobenzorax; meth-
Amphetamine, Tegretol, an anti-seizure medication; Paxil, an anti-depressant, were
all present in his post-mortem toxicology screen. Without the GCMS, the state crime
lab would not have found the drug that killed Chris Antley. The drug did not show in
standard drug testing. The original cause of death was listed as a homicide, because of
the numerous severe soft tissue injuries found on his body. After winning the Derby in
1999 and riding in all three Triple Crown races, he retired again, because of his
ballooning weight and increasing drug use. Because he required constant drug testing
while riding, and had a constant battle with the scales, he couldn’t maintain the battle.
He finally lost his battle December 2, 1999, when the drugs finally won.

DNA testing is not simply for verifying parentage. It is used to detect such
genetic problems as HYPP, OLWS, and SCID. These genetic disorders cost
owners, breeders, and insurance companies millions of dollars each year from
either expensive medical maintenance or the death of the foal.

DNA testing is used to test for genetic diseases such as HYPP. Hyper-
Kalemic Periodic Paralysis (HYPP), is a hereditary genetic defect that causes a disruption
in the sodium ion channel. This disease is found in Quarter Horse bloodlines. The defect
allows too much sodium into the membrane of muscle cells. This in turn causes
uncontrolled muscle twitching, and extreme muscle weakness. These attacks are
unpredictable, and symptoms can vary from uncontrolled muscle twitching to respiratory
paralysis and death.

This disease is preventable by DNA testing. So far the only bloodline found to
possess the defective gene is the IMPRESSIVE bloodline. Because several breeds have
Quarter Horse blood, more specific, IMPRESSIVE bloodlines, the disease has spread
from Quarter Horses only, to Paints and Appaloosas, as well. When buying a horse,
asking for a genetic profile to include HYPP is becoming the rule rather than the
exception. By requiring a genetic profile on breeding stock, not only are the owners
ruling out the possibility of getting an HYPP foal, they are also making sure they are
getting the stud service they pay for.

The Paint Horse industry is affected not only by HYPP but Paint Horses are
also vulnerable to Lethal White Syndrome. This genetic abnormality causes
developmental problems in the colon of Paint Horses. Most of the horses affected are
either all white or predominantly white. The distal end of the colon does not develop
properly. This under - developed colon can cause severe colic in the newborn foal.
There is no cure, and the foal has to be euthanized shortly after birth. By genetically
testing the mare and stallion, the breeders can not only rule out producing a Lethal White foal,
but can also genetically test for color. The Paint Horse Association provides forms to
Paint owners for Tobiano, and Multiple Coat Color. By genetic testing, the owner/breeder
can now breed for color, and to rule out major genetic defects. By selective breeding the
owners/breeders can cut their operating losses by producing more live and healthy foals per
breeding season. By being able to guarantee a genetically sound foal a breeder can improve
sales and the overall bloodline.

The Arabian industry also has its own genetic disease to deal with. Severe
Combined immunodeficiency (CID or SCID) is found in Arab and Arab-related horses.
The immune system in these animals does not function properly and the foals die shortly
after birth. The foals usually die from respiratory infections. Antibiotics help for short
periods but in the long run the foal dies from an infection. Because this is a recessive
gene problem DNA testing for parentage as well as disease can prevent foals being born
with this problem.

The horse industry is fraught with problems without factoring in genetic defects,
fraud, drugs (both legal and illegal), and any number of other deceits that someone who
is desperate to win will come up with. The new scientific research has in some ways
made the idea of switching semen for AI look good for some. But with the new age of
genetics research the ability to defraud has almost become impossible. Insurance companies
are now encouraging and in some cases requiring their policy holders to get DNA testing on
their horses, before buying a horse, before breeding, before sale, before shipping and so on.
The insurance industry recognizes University of California at Davis as an authority on equine
DNA testing. The insurance company feels $100 for a DNA test on a blood horse a small
expense, in comparison, to the amount of money it could save everyone in the long run.

When someone goes to the races, whether flat racing at Lone Star Park, or a
harness racing at Cal Expo, forensic science is alive and well. These tracks all have
rules and regulations concerning DNA parentage identification, drugs, the ones allowed
and the ones strictly forbidden. The levels of some allowed drugs also are tested in
urine, blood, saliva, and hair. The people as well as the horses are subject to these rules.
The jockeys and their mounts can be handed a cup after a race, and be told to, “donate”.
With science as advanced as it is today, there will always be someone getting caught who
can’t play by the rules. These are the people who give racing a bad name by giving a lame
horse a large quantity of pain killers just to win. These are usually the horses that are carried
away after they have fallen or have broken down on the track. The trainers have a constant
battle keeping their horses sound and able to race without painkillers. The jockeys also have
a constant battle, with their weight. They have to weigh in every day. They have to be
within so many pounds of an ideal riding weight, or they are fined or suspended. Many times
their drug problems start with trying to makeweight and escalates from there. Injuries are
another reason jockeys may start usingdrugs. They need drugs to kill pain. Jockeys ride
everyday with aches and pains but some ride with more pain than others. Jockey Danny Lavergne,
who was the leading Quarter Horse rider at Houston in the fall meet finished the meet with
152 wins and multiple ruptured discs. The race meet ended on Saturday night, on Monday he
had back surgery to “fix” the ruptured discs.

Forensic science is used in many scenarios and most people don’t even realize it.
The world of horse racing and breeding has in the past been a hotbed of fraud and dirty
deals. With the new genetic testing and ability to test for more illegal substances the
industry has reformed quite a bit. While there are still those who try to win at any
price they are becoming fewer and farther between. The more advanced science
becomes the better the industry will be for it. Forensic science, because it is used in
conjunction with law enforcement, is alive and well and used every day in the life of a
racehorse.

Article by: Lisa Crounse

Forensic Science Student 2005


