Custom Website Design & Development 

Planning, organizing, designing, and developing professional and innovative websites that meet your business needs is our business.
Our professional team is dedicated to building our clients effective and visually appealing websites that provide value to the 
customers who visit their site.  Whether you need a site that creates an easy online shopping experience, provides dynamic information,
or showcases something unique or special, Caffeine Web Design can get you there.  

Website Redesign or Enhancements

Websites often need refinement and improvement over time to maitain a positive customer experience and meet the needs
of your growing business. Over time, your may need to add new pages to your site as you provide additional information to your 
clients or the products and services you offer evolves over time. Caffeine Web Design can update your website or if needed, give 
your site a fresh new look that reflects your image and meets your current needs . 

Adding Functionality 

Caffeine Web Design programming professionals use a wide variety of available technologies to make sure your site conatains all 
the functionality your business requires. The right functinality for your site depends on the objectives of your website. Caffeine Web Design specializes in designing 
completely customized applications that will provide your website with any functionality you may require. At 
Caffeine, We want your site to meet all of your goals and expectations as well as the goals and expectations of your users. 
Below are a few examples of functionality you may wish to include in your site.

-Mailing Lists / Newsletters
-Registered User Lists
-Dynamic Content Management
-Customer Specific Information
-Inventory Tracking
-Adding Questioneers or Forms to your site
-Database Driven site content

Database Connectivity

A database is an efficient method for storing customer contact information or managing your inventory.  If you site requires a database, we 
have the experience to build an efficient data storage repository to meet your needs.

Maintaining Your Website

Caffine Web Design is avaialbe for contract hire at an hourly rate for any maintenance your website may require.  In addition, we build custom
applications for your website that will allow you or your employees to perform any routine maintenance such as swaping out graphics or photographs, 
content management, or modifying, deleting, or adding inventory. 

Domain Names and Hosting

We can help you determine the best domain name for your website, make sure it is available, and register it.  
Based on your particular needs, we will help determine the best hosting company for your site's traffic.  A hosting company will charge a monthly fee for
hosting your website. We will contact the hosting company and help you get setup with a hosting package that is right for you. If you prefer, we do 
offer a monthly site maintainance program which will include host maintainance and all minor updates to your site. Send us an email or give us a call for more information.


Search Engine Ranking and Optimization

We are dedicated to improving the visibility of your site to the people who are searching for the information or products your website has to offer.
Our goal is to drive as much traffic to your site in the most cost-effective mannor. Search engine optimaztion is the best way to accomplish this 
goal.  Other options are available, such as directory listing and pay-per-click.  We can also help you with these services if you would like to 
pursue either of these avenues.
